---

copyright:
  years: 2023, 2026
lastupdated: "2026-01-02"

keywords: logging for hyper protect virtual server for vpc, encrypt log messages for hyper protect virtual server for vpc

subcollection: vpc

---

{{site.data.keyword.attribute-definition-list}}

# Encrypting log messages
{: #encrypt-log-messages-for-hyper-protect-virtual-servers-for-vpc}

This tutorial walks you through how to encrypt log messages that are generated by your container workload in your Hyper Protect Virtual Server for VPC instance.
{: shortdesc}

## Objective
{: #objective}

Every Hyper Protect Virtual Server for VPC instance is created with a valid [contract](/docs/vpc?topic=vpc-about-contract_se). One section of the contract stores your [logging configuration](/docs/vpc?topic=vpc-logging-for-hyper-protect-virtual-servers-for-vpc). The logs that are produced by your deployed workload are sent through TLS to your designated logging service and are later displayed on the logging dashboard.

If your workload produces sensitive information, you can take similar steps as in this tutorial to make selected log messages display as ciphertext on the logging dashboard. To retrieve the deciphered messages, you can download the logs from your Log Analysis instance and decrypt them locally.

In this tutorial, we use Log Analysis as the logging service. The process also applies to a syslog server.

## Introduction
{: #introduction}

This tutorial explains how to deploy Docker Compose or Podman Play as a Hyper Protect Virtual Server instance. You can use one of the following approaches.

[`log-encryption`](https://github.com/ibm-hyper-protect/samples/tree/main/log-encryption) is a sample repository folder.

### Docker Compose approach
{: #doccomp}

- In the [`log-encryption`](https://github.com/ibm-hyper-protect/samples/tree/main/log-encryption) folder, you have a `docker-compose.yaml` file under `/compose` directory, which deploys and manages the Docker Compose application. The image that we use is the official Ubuntu image from [DockerHub](https://hub.docker.com/_/ubuntu).
- The `docker-compose.yaml` file contains a command that asks Docker Compose to run a shell script (`example.sh`) that prints a line of plain text and a line of encrypted message to the standard output. This `example.sh` file exists in the `/compose/bin` directory.
- A public key `logging.pub` is required for encrypting the log message. This file must exist in the `/compose` folder. This tutorial shows an example of generating a key pair encrypted through AES with a passphrase by using `openssl`.
- The `volumes:` instruction tells Docker Compose to mount the Docker Compose volume with the public key and the simple logging application to `/var/logging` inside the container. The Ubuntu image starts as a container later and run `example.sh` as its main application.

### Podman Play approach
{: #podplay}

- In the [`log-encryption`](https://github.com/ibm-hyper-protect/samples/tree/main/log-encryption) folder, you have `pods.yaml` file under `/pods` directory, which deploys and manages the container application to be used in this tutorial. The image that we use is the official Ubuntu image from [DockerHub](https://hub.docker.com/_/ubuntu).
- The Podman Play file contains a command that asks Podman to run a shell script (`example.sh`) that prints a line of plain text and a line of encrypted message to the standard output. This `example.sh` file exists in the `/pods/bin` directory.
- A public key `logging.pub` is required for encrypting the log message. This file must exist in the `/pods` folder. This tutorial shows an example of generating a key pair encrypted through AES with a passphrase by using `openssl`.
- The `volumes:` instruction tells Podman to mount the Podman volume with the public key and the simple logging application to `/var/logging` inside the container. The Ubuntu image starts as a container later and run `example.sh` as its main application.

The [contract](/docs/vpc?topic=vpc-about-contract_se) is a YAML file to specify the Hyper Protect Virtual Server instance that you want to create. In this tutorial, a dedicated public and private key pair is used to encrypt and decrypt the selected log messages.

You must abide to the following rules:
​​​​​​
   - ​​​​​​You must keep the private key to decrypt the downloaded logs later.
   - ​The public key must be embedded into the contract, which is a special approach for our case. The public key ​​​​​`​logging.pub​​​​` is stored under the `​​​​​​/log-encryption/pods`​​​​ folder for Podman approach and ​​​​​​`/log-encryption/compose`​​​​ folder for Docker Compose along with the `​​​​​​pods.yaml`​​​​ file and ​​​​​​`docker-compose.yaml​​​`​ respectively. As mentioned in the preparation of the [`workload` section](/docs/vpc?topic=vpc-about-contract_se#hpcr_contract_workload)​ of the contract, the `archive` subsection contains the `​​​​​​base64​​​`​ encoded TGZ file archive of ​​​​​`​podman-play`​​​​. The ​​​​​`​logging.pub​​​`​ file in our example undergoes the same encoding and compression, since it is stored in the same folder. As a result, the created instance acquires the public key for subsequent log encryption.​​​​

​​​​​​This tutorial also provides sample files such as ​​​​​`​env.yaml​​​`​, ​​​​​`​workload.compose.yaml​​​`​ (for Docker Compose), ​​​​​`​workload.pods.yaml​​​​`(for Podman Play), and ​​​​​`​user-data.yaml`​​​​. They are only meant as references for correct schema.​​​

## Before you begin
{: #hpvs-prereq}

1. Install [OpenSSL](https://www.openssl.org/){: external} for encryption. This tutorial uses version 3.0 or later.
1. Set up your logging instance by following the [documentation](/docs/vpc?topic=vpc-logging-for-hyper-protect-virtual-servers-for-vpc).
1. The example runs on a Linux system.

## Prepare your contract
{: #prepare-your-contract}

This tutorial gets you started with a simple Hyper Protect Virtual Server for VPC contract that has only an [`env` section](/docs/vpc?topic=vpc-about-contract_se#hpcr_contract_env) and a [`workload` section](/docs/vpc?topic=vpc-about-contract_se#hpcr_contract_workload).

As recommended in [contract encryption](/docs/vpc?topic=vpc-about-contract_se#hpcr_contract_encrypt), we encrypt both sections. When the instance boots, the bootloader decrypts the contract if it's encrypted. Follow the instructions at [Downloading the encryption certificate and extracting the public key](/docs/vpc?topic=vpc-about-contract_se#encrypt_downloadcert). This tutorial uses the [certificate](https://hpvsvpcubuntu.s3.us.cloud-object-storage.appdomain.cloud/s390x-24/ibm-hyper-protect-container-runtime-1-0-s390x-24-encrypt.crt){: external} for the IBM Hyper Protect Container Runtime image version `ibm-hyper-protect-container-runtime-1-0-s390x-24`. Downloaded the encryption certificate and rename it to `hpcr.crt`. Follow the steps to obtain the simple contract:

1. Get the hostname and the API key of your IBM Cloud Logs instance. For more information, see [Logging for Hyper Protect Virtual Servers for VPC](/docs/vpc?topic=vpc-logging-for-hyper-protect-virtual-servers-for-vpc).

1. Create and encrypt the `env` section. Refer to the `env.yaml` file in the `log-encryption` folder for the correct schema. Replace the content with your logging hostname and API keys. Run the `encrypt-basic.sh` script to obtain the encrypted `env` section of the contract.
   ```sh
   cat env.yaml | ./encrypt-basic.sh hpcr.crt
   ```
   {: codeblock}

1. Create the workload section. Refer to the `workload.pods.yaml` (for Podman Play) or `workload.compose.yaml` (for Docker Compose) sample file in the `log-encryption` folder for the correct schema. In this example, the Podman play file in the `log-encryption` folder is used for the `podman` subsection and Docker Compose uses the `compose` subsection.

   In addition, provide the public key for encrypting the log messages. Run the following commands to generate a key pair. We proceed with the public key. Note that `logEncrypt` is the passphrase to generate keys, you can use your own.

   ```sh
   openssl genrsa -aes128 -passout pass:logEncrypt -out logging 4096
   ```
   {: codeblock}

   ```sj
   openssl rsa -in logging -passin pass:logEncrypt -pubout -out logging.pub
   ```
   {: codeblock}

1. A sample output can be found in the `pods` folder (for Podman Play) or `docker-compose` folder (for Docker Compose) under `log-encryption`. Keep in mind that the `logging.pub` file that contains the public key must be stored in the `pods` (for Podman Play) or `docker-compose` folder (for Docker Compose) along with `pods.yaml` or `docker-compose.yaml` respectively.

   Compress and encrypt the folder, as the `play` (for Podman Play) or `compose` (for Docker Compose) subsection requires this for the archive value. Use the following command to obtain the `base64` encoded archive as a file named `play.b64` (for Podman Play) or `compose.b64` (for Docker Compose). Use the raw content of `play.b64` (for Podman Play) or `compose.b64` (for Docker Compose) for the value of archive under the play or compose subsection respectively.

   - For Podman Play:

      ```sh
      tar czvf pods.tgz pods/bin pods/pods.yaml pods/logging.pub bin/
      base64 -w0 pods.tgz > pods.b64
      ```
      {: codeblock}

   - For Docker Compose:

      ```sh
      tar czvf compose.tgz compose/bin compose/docker-compose.yaml compose/logging.pub bin/
      base64 -w0 compose.tgz > compose.b64
      ```
      {: codeblock}
   

1. Run the `encrypt-basic.sh` script to obtain the encrypted `workload` section of the contract.

   - For Podman Play:

      ```sh
      cat workload.pods.yaml | ./encrypt-basic.sh hpcr.crt
      ```
      {: codeblock}

   - For Docker Compose:

      ```sh
      cat workload.pods.yaml | ./encrypt-basic.sh hpcr.crt
      ```
      {: codeblock}

1. Complete the `user-data.yaml` with the output of Step 2 and 5. Refer to the sample `user-data.yaml` for the correct schema. Note the `hyper-protect-basic` token approach to implement hybrid encryption, as it's used throughout IBM Cloud Hyper Protect Virtual Server for VPC.

## Create your Hyper Protect Virtual Server instance
{: #create-virtual-server}

With the contract (user data) available, we go ahead to create an instance.

The quickest way is to use the [UI](/docs/vpc?topic=vpc-about-se&interface=ui#create-hyper-protect-virtual-servers-for-vpc-instance). For **Operating system**, choose [**IBM Hyper Protect**](/docs/vpc?topic=vpc-vsabout-images#hyper-protect-runtime) to create a Hyper Protect Virtual Server for VPC instance. Paste your user data in the `User data` box. Click **Create virtual server instance** when you are ready.

## Decrypt log messages
{: #decrypt-log-messages}

Monitor the serial console. When the virtual server instance is up and running, go to the IBM Cloud Log instance that you provisioned. Open the dashboard and find the ciphertext, which is your encrypted log message.

Use `decrypt-basic.sh` along with the private key that you generated to decipher the encrypted log message.
```sh
echo hyper-protect-basic.rdf...EqM | ./decrypt-basic.sh logging
```
{: codeblock}
